Chapter: Related Work / Section: Previous Work (#18)
ysndr/MSc-Thesis: chapter/related-work.md

This chapter will survey a varied range of popular language servers, compare common capabilities, and implementation approaches.
Additionally, this part aims to recognize alternative approaches to the LSP, in the form of legacy protocols, extensible development platforms LSP extensions and the emerging Language Server Index Format.

## Previous Approaches

### IDEs

Before the invention of the Language Server Protocol, extensive language support used to be provided by an IDE.
Yet, the range of officially supported languages remained relatively small [@intellij-supported-languages].
While integration for popular languages was common, IDE grade support for less popular ones was all but guaranteed and relied mainly on community efforts.

> In fact Eclipse[@eclipse-a-platform,eclipse-www], IntelliJ[@intelliJ], and Visual Studio[@VisualStudio], to this day the most popular IDE choices, Focus on a narrow subset of languages, historically, Java and .NET.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In fact Eclipse[@eclipse-a-platform,eclipse-www], IntelliJ[@intelliJ], and Visual Studio[@VisualStudio], to this day the most popular IDE choices, focus on a narrow subset of languages, historically Java and .NET.
```

> Additional languages can be integrated by custom (third-party) plugins or derivations of the base platform ([@list-of-eclipse,@jetbrains-all-products]).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additional languages can be integrated by custom (third-party) plugins or extensions of the base platform ([@list-of-eclipse,@jetbrains-all-products]).
```
I don't know, but derivations sounded a bit strange in this context. Maybe it's Nix influence

Author: With derivations i mean all the different Eclipse based ide's.
Although they are in the end just plugins too

Reviewer: Oh, then I think maybe the right word is "derivative" instead? It does sound more familiar than derivation, which I think rather refers to the act, the process of making a derivative (the product).

> Due to the proprietary nature of some of these products, plugins are not compatible between different platforms.

Reviewer: As much as I love open source, I think that's a bit unfair. Vim and emacs plugins are not compatible either. I guess having a common interface for plugins, for editors developed in different languages with different architectures and capabilities is just too constraining.

Author: Fair enough, its more general than economics.

Many less popular languages therefore saw redundant implementations of what is essentially the same.
For Haskell separate efforts produced an eclipse based IDE [@haskell-ide-eclips], as well as independent IntelliJ plugins [@intellij-haskell,@HaskForce].
Importantly, the implementers of the former reported troubles with the language barrier between Haskell and the Eclipse base written in Java.

The Haskell language is an exceptional example since there is also a native Haskell IDE[@haskell-for-mac] albeit that it is available only to the MacOS operating system.

> This showcases the difficulties of language tooling and its provision.

Reviewer: Why? How does it showcase it?

> In general, developing language integrations, both as the vendor of an IDE or third-party plugin developer requires extensive resources.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In general, developing language integrations, both as the vendor of an IDE or a third-party plugin developer requires extensive resources.
```

> [Table @tbl:plugins-size] gives an idea of the efforts-required.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Table @tbl:plugins-size] gives an idea of the efforts required.
```

> Strikingly, since the IntelliJ platform is based on the JVM, its plugin system requires the use of JVM languages [@custom-language-support]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since the IntelliJ platform is based on the JVM, its plugin system requires the use of JVM languages [@custom-language-support], making it hard to reuse the code of e.g. a reference compiler or interpreter.
```

| intellij-haskell          | 17249 (Java) + 13476 (Scala) **+ 0 (Haskell)**               |
| intellij-rust             | 229131 (Kotlin) + 3958 (Rust)                                |
| intellij-scala            | 39382 (Java) + 478904 (Scala)                                |
| intellij-kotlin           | 182372 (Java) + 563394 (Kotlin)                              |
| intellij-community/python | 47720 (C) + 248177 (Java) + 37101 (Kotlin) + 277125 (Python) |

: Comparison of the size for different IntelliJ platform plugins {#tbl:plugins-size}

Naturally, development efforts at this size would gravitate around the most promising solution, stifling the progress on competing platforms [@intellij-comparison-eclipse].
Additionally, it would lock-in programmers into a specific platform for its language support regardless of their personal preference.

### IDE Abstraction

#### Monto

The authors of the Monto project[@monto,@monto-disintegrated] call this the "IDE Portability Problem".
They compare the situation with the task of compiling different high level languages to a set of CPU architectures.
The answer to that problem was an intermediate representation (IR).

> Compilers could transform input languages into this IR and in turn generate assembly for different architectures from a single input format.

Reviewer: This sentence is a bit confusing because it sounds like you are describing Monto, which appears as an IR for code generation. Maybe a comparison would make things clearer, and I guess LLVM is a good comparison.

> The authors of the Monto project[@monto,@monto-disintegrated] call this the "IDE Portability Problem".
> They compare the situation with the task of compiling different high level languages to a set of CPU architectures.
> The answer to that problem was an intermediate representation (IR).
> Compilers could transform input languages into this IR and in turn generate assembly for different architectures from a single input format.

Author: ```suggestion
The authors of the Monto project[@monto,@monto-disintegrated] call this the "IDE Portability Problem".
They compare the situation with the task of compiling different high level languages to a set of CPU architectures.
In Compilers, the answer to that problem was the use of an intermediate representation (IR).
A major compiler toolchain making use of this is the LLVM [@llvm].
Compiler frontends for different languages -- e.g. Clang, Rustc, NVCC,... -- compile input languages into LLVM IR, a low level language with additional capabilities to provide optimization hints but independent of a particular architecture.
LLVM performs optimization of the IR and passes it to a compiler backend which in turn generates bytecode for specific architectures e.g. `x86_64`, `MIPS`, `aarch64`, `wasm`, etc.
Notably through this mechanism, languages gain support for a range of architectures and profit from existing optimizations developed for the IR.
```

With Monto, Kreidel et al propose a similar idea for IDE portability.
The paper describes the *Monto IR* and how they use a *Message Broker* to receive events from the Editor and dispatch them to *Monto Services*.

> The Monto IR is a language agnostic and editor independent, JSON serialized tree-like model.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Monto IR is a language-agnostic and editor-independent tree-like model serialized as JSON.
```

Additionally, the IR maintains low level syntax highlighting information (font, color, style, etc.) but leaves the highlighting to the language specific service.

The processing and modification of the source code and IR is performed by *Monto Services*.
Services implement specific actions, e.g. parsing, outlining or highlighting.
A central broker connects the services with each other and the editor.

Since Monto performs all work on the IR, independent of the editor, and serializes the IR as JSON messages, the language used to implement *Monto Services* can be chosen freely giving even more flexibility.

The Editor extension's responsibility is to act as a source and sink for data.
It sends Monto compliant messages to the broker and receives processing results such as (error) reports.
The communication is based on the ZeroMQ[zeromq] technology which was chosen because it is lightweight and available in manly languages [@monto-disintegrated] allowing to make use of existing language tools.

> 

Reviewer: This Monto stuff is really interesting.

Author: Yes it looks really flexible, but burdened itself with doing basically everything including lowest level syntax coloring.

#### Merlin

The Merlin tool [@merlin,@merlin-website] is in many ways a more specific version of the idea presented in Monto.
Merlin is a language server for the Ocaml language, yet predates the Language Server Protocol.

The authors of Merlin postulate that implementing "tooling support traditionally provided by IDEs" for "niche languages" demands to "share the language-awareness logic" between implementations.
As an answer to that, they describe the architecture of Merlin in [@merlin].

Similarly to Monto, Merlin separates editor extensions from language analysis.

> Conversely, its interaction builds on a command line interface instead of message passing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, Merlin uses a command line interface instead of message passing for interaction.
```
Just a suggestion, but `conversely` sounded a bit out of place here.

Editor extensions expose the server functions to the user by integrating with the editor.

> The Merlin server hand provides a single optimized implementation of code intelligence for Ocaml.

Reviewer: > server hand
Did you mean server side?

Since all resources could be put to a single project, multiple iterations of performance improvements were done on Merlin.

> It now supports partial, incremental parsing and type-checking which allows users to query information even about incomplete or incorrect programs.

Reviewer: The 3 lines above are slightly heavy. Suggestion:

"Thanks to this architecture, the Merlin developers have been able to put all their effort in a single server providing code intelligence for Ocaml source code. As a result, Merlin is performant, features fault-tolerant and incremental parsing as well as incremental typechecking, which allows users to query information even about incomplete or incorrect programs.

Author: see: https://github.com/ysndr/MSc-Thesis/pull/18/files#r820110050

Notably, being written in Ocaml, Merlin can make use of existing tools of the Ocaml language.
In fact, its parser and type-checker are based on the respective original implementations.
The Merlin project did however have to adapt the Ocaml type-checker to support the aforementioned incrementality.

> Changes are made against a copy of the relevant modules shipped with Merlin which facilitates keeping up with the latest developments of the language.

Reviewer: Suggestion:

"Merlin is written in Ocaml as well, and as such reuses large parts of the parser and the typechecker of the reference OCaml implementation. Still, incremental parsing and typechecking has required non-trivial changes to the original code, and Merlin vendors its own modified version of the core ocaml components."

Author: https://github.com/ysndr/MSc-Thesis/pull/18/files#r820109214

> While Merlin serves as a single implementation used by all clients, unlike Monto it does not specify a language independent format, or service architecture.

Reviewer: Maybe repeat here also the big difference that it specializes in only one language, while Monto is generic, which is a huge difference.

Author: ```suggestion
While Merlin serves as a single implementation used by all clients, unlike Monto it does not specify a language independent format, or service architecture.
In fact, Merlin explicitly specializes in a single language and provides a complete implementation where Monto merely defines the language agnostic interface to implement a server on.
```

Author: how about so or do you think it should be even more explicit?

Reviewer: This sentence is fine.

> While Merlin serves as a single implementation used by all clients, unlike Monto it does not specify a language independent format, or service architecture.

Author: ```suggestion
While Merlin serves as a single implementation used by all clients, unlike Monto it does not specify a language independent format, or service architecture.
In fact Merlin explicitly specializes in a single language and provides a complete implementation where Monto merely defines the language agnostic interface to implement a server on.
```

The Editor extension's responsibility is to act as a source and sink for data.
It sends Monto compliant messages to the broker and receives processing results such as (error) reports.
The communication is based on the ZeroMQ[zeromq] technology which was chosen because it is lightweight and available in manly languages [@monto-disintegrated] allowing to make use of existing language tools.

#### Merlin

The Merlin tool [@merlin,@merlin-website] is in many ways a more specific version of the idea presented in Monto.
Merlin is a language server for the Ocaml language, yet predates the Language Server Protocol.

The authors of Merlin postulate that implementing "tooling support traditionally provided by IDEs" for "niche languages" demands to "share the language-awareness logic" between implementations.
As an answer to that, they describe the architecture of Merlin in [@merlin].

Similarly to Monto, Merlin separates editor extensions from language analysis.
However, Merlin uses a command line interface instead of message passing for interaction.
Editor extensions expose the server functions to the user by integrating with the editor.

> The Merlin server hand provides a single optimized implementation of code intelligence for Ocaml.
> Since all resources could be put to a single project, multiple iterations of performance improvements were done on Merlin.
> It now supports partial, incremental parsing and type-checking which allows users to query information even about incomplete or incorrect programs.

Author: ```suggestion
Thanks to this architecture, the Merlin developers have been able to focus their efforts in a single project providing intelligence for OCaml source code.
The result of this work is feature is a platform independent, performant and fault-tolerant provider of language intelligence.
Special care has been taken with the implementation with regards to incremental parsing typechecking and analysis, which allows users to query information even about incomplete or incorrect programs.
```

Reviewer: This looks ok, but you may want to reread it, there are several typos (like "is feature is a platform independent").

> Notably, being written in Ocaml, Merlin can make use of existing tools of the Ocaml language.
> In fact, its parser and type-checker are based on the respective original implementations.
> The Merlin project did however have to adapt the Ocaml type-checker to support the aforementioned incrementality.
> Changes are made against a copy of the relevant modules shipped with Merlin which facilitates keeping up with the latest developments of the language.

Author: ```suggestion
Since both Merlin and the OCaml compiler are written in OCaml, Merlin is able to reuse large parts of the reference OCaml implementation.
This allows Merlin to avoid reimplementing every single feature of the language.
Still, incremental parsing and typechecking is not a priority to the compiler which prompted the developers of Merlin to vendor modified versions of the core OCaml components.
```
